Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Prisoner of Zenda, by Anthony Hope

December, 1993  [Etext #95]


*The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Prisoner of Zenda, by Hope*
*****This file should be named zenda10.txt or zenda10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, zenda11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, zenda10a.txt.

This etext was created by Judith Boss, Omaha, Nebraska.  The
equipment: an IBM-compatible 486/50, a Hewlett-Packard ScanJet
IIc flatbed scanner, and a copy of Calera Recognition Systems'
M/600 Series Professional OCR software and RISC accelerator
board donated by Calera.

For more information about this,
ask about:

M/Series Profesional Software
M/Series Accelerator Card
Calera Recognition Systems
475 Potrero
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
1-408-720-8300

mikel@calera.com Mike Lynch


The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about one million dollars for each hour we work.  One
hundred hours is a conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce a
million dollars per hour; next year we will have to do four text
files per month, thus upping our productivity to two million/hr.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/IBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

David Turner, Project Gutenberg
Illinois  Benedictine  College
5700  College  Road
Lisle, IL 60532-0900

Email requests to:
Internet:    chipmonk@eagle.ibc.edu (David Turner)
Compuserve:  chipmonk@eagle.ibc.edu (David Turner)
Attmail:     internet!chipmonk@eagle.ibc.edu (David Turner)
MCImail:     (David Turner)
ADDRESS TYPE: MCI / EMS: INTERNET / MBX:chipmonk@eagle.ibc.edu

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please:

FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext91
or cd etext92 [for new books]  [now also cd etext/etext92]
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX and AAINDEX
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)

****START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START****

Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT

By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext,
you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept this
"Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive a
refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by sending
a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person you got
it from.  If you received this etext on a physical medium (such
as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS

This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association (the
"Project").  Among other things, this means that no one owns a
United States copyright on or for this work, so the Project (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special
rules, set forth below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute
this etext under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable efforts
to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain works.
Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any medium they
may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other things, Defects
may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data,
transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other etext medium,
a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be
read by your equipment.

DISCLAIMER

But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this etext
from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all liability to
you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees, and
[2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILI-
TY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL
DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you
paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to
the person you received it from.  If you received it on a
physical medium, you must return it with your note, and such
person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement copy.
If you received it electronically, such person may choose to
alternatively give you a second opportunity to receive it elec-
tronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY

You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise from any
distribution of this etext for which you are responsible, and
from [1] any alteration, modification or addition to the etext
for which you are responsible, or [2] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"

You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this "Small
Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg, or:
[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this re-
     quires that you do not remove, alter or modify the etext or
     this "small print!" statement.  You may however, if you
     wish, distribute this etext in machine readable binary,
     compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form, including any
     form resulting from conversion by word processing or hyper-
     text software, but only so long as *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable.  We
          consider an etext *not* clearly readable if it
          contains characters other than those intended by the
          author of the work, although tilde (~), asterisk (*)
          and underline (_) characters may be used to convey
          punctuation intended by the author, and additional
          characters may be used to indicate hypertext links.

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at no
          expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form
          by the program that displays the etext (as is the
          case, for instance, with most word processors).

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at no
          additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext
          in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC or
          other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]   Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee of 20% (twenty percent) of the
     net profits you derive from distributing this etext under
     the trademark, determined in accordance with generally
     accepted accounting practices.  The license fee:

     [*]  Is required only if you derive such profits.  In
          distributing under our trademark, you incur no
          obligation to charge money or earn profits for your
          distribution.

     [*]  Shall be paid to "Project Gutenberg Association /
          Illinois Benedictine College" (or to such other person
          as the Project Gutenberg Association may direct)
          within the 60 days following each date you prepare (or
          were legally required to prepare) your year-end tax
          return with respect to your income for that year.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?

The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Illinois Benedictine College".

WRITE TO US!  We can be reached at:

Project Gutenberg Director of Communications (PGDIRCOM)

Internet:     pgdircom@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Bitnet:       pgdircom@uiucvmd
CompuServe:   >internet:pgdircom@.vmd.cso.uiuc.edu
Attmail:      internet!vmd.cso.uiuc.edu!pgdircom

Drafted by CHARLES B. KRAMER, Attorney
CompuServe:  72600,2026
  Internet:  72600.2026@compuserve.com
       Tel:  (212) 254-5093
*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.07.02.92*END*





The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Prisoner of Zenda, by Anthony Hope



CONTENTS



 1  The Rassendylls--With a Word on the Elphbergs
 2  Concerning the Colour of Men's Hair
 3  A Merry Evening with a Distant Relative
 4  The King Keeps his Appointment
 5  The Adventures of an Understudy
 6  The Secret of a Cellar
 7  His Majesty Sleeps in Strelsau
 8  A Fair Cousin and a Dark Brother
 9  A New Use for a Tea-Table
10  A Great Chance for a Villain
11  Hunting a Very Big Boar
12  I Receive a Visitor and Bait a Hook
13  An Improvement on Jacob's Ladder
14  A Night Outside the Castle
15  I Talk with a Tempter
16  A Desperate Plan
17  Young Rupert's Midnight Diversions
18  The Forcing of the Trap
19  Face to Face in the Forest
20  The Prisoner and the King
21  If Love Were All!
22  Present, Past--and Future?




The Prisoner of Zenda

by Anthony Hope




CHAPTER 1


The Rassendylls--With a Word on the Elphbergs


"I wonder when in the world you're going to do anything, Rudolf?"
said my brother's wife.

"My dear Rose," I answered, laying down my egg-spoon,
"why in the world should I do anything?  My position is a
comfortable one.  I have an income nearly sufficient for my
wants (no one's income is ever quite sufficient, you know),
I enjoy an enviable social position: I am brother to
Lord Burlesdon, and brother-in-law to that charming lady,
his countess.  Behold, it is enough!"

"You are nine-and-twenty," she observed, "and you've done
nothing but--"

"Knock about?  It is true.  Our family doesn't need to do things."

This remark of mine rather annoyed Rose, for everybody
knows (and therefore there can be no harm in referring to the
fact) that, pretty and accomplished as she herself is, her family
is hardly of the same standing as the Rassendylls.  Besides her
attractions, she possessed a large fortune, and my brother
Robert was wise enough not to mind about her ancestry.
Ancestry is, in fact, a matter concerning which the next
observation of Rose's has some truth.

"Good families are generally worse than any others," she said.

Upon this I stroked my hair: I knew quite well what she meant.

"I'm so glad Robert's is black!" she cried.

At this moment Robert (who rises at seven and works before breakfast)
came in.  He glanced at his wife: her cheek was slightly flushed;
he patted it caressingly.

"What's the matter, my dear?" he asked.

"She objects to my doing nothing and having red hair," said I,
in an injured tone.

"Oh! of course he can't help his hair," admitted Rose.

"It generally crops out once in a generation," said my brother.
"So does the nose.  Rudolf has got them both."

"I wish they didn't crop out," said Rose, still flushed.

"I rather like them myself," said I, and, rising,
I bowed to the portrait of Countess Amelia.

My brother's wife uttered an exclamation of impatience.

"I wish you'd take that picture away, Robert," said she.

"My dear!" he cried.

"Good heavens!" I added.

"Then it might be forgotten," she continued.

"Hardly--with Rudolf about," said Robert, shaking his head.

"Why should it be forgotten?" I asked.

"Rudolf!" exclaimed my brother's wife, blushing very prettily.

I laughed, and went on with my egg.  At least I had shelved
the question of what (if anything) I ought to do.  And, by way of
closing the discussion--and also, I must admit, of exasperating
my strict little sister-in-law a trifle more--I observed:

"I rather like being an Elphberg myself."

When I read a story, I skip the explanations; yet the moment
I begin to write one, I find that I must have an explanation.
For it is manifest that I must explain why my sister-in-law was vexed
with my nose and hair, and why I ventured to call myself an Elphberg.
For eminent as, I must protest, the Rassendylls have been for many generations,
yet participation in their blood of course does not, at first sight,
justify the boast of a connection with the grander stock of the Elphbergs
or a claim to be one of that Royal House.  For what relationship is there
between Ruritania and Burlesdon, between the Palace at Strelsau
or the Castle of Zenda and Number 305 Park Lane, W.?

Well then--and I must premise that I am going, perforce, to
rake up the very scandal which my dear Lady Burlesdon wishes
forgotten--in the year 1733, George II sitting then on the
throne, peace reigning for the moment, and the King and the
Prince of Wales being not yet at loggerheads, there came on a
visit to the English Court a certain prince, who was afterwards
known to history as Rudolf the Third of Ruritania.  The prince
was a tall, handsome young fellow, marked (maybe marred, it
is not for me to say) by a somewhat unusually long, sharp and
straight nose, and a mass of dark-red hair--in fact, the nose and
the hair which have stamped the Elphbergs time out of mind.
He stayed some months in England, where he was most
courteously received; yet, in the end, he left rather under a
cloud.  For he fought a duel (it was considered highly well bred
of him to waive all question of his rank) with a nobleman, well
known in the society of the day, not only for his own merits, but
as the husband of a very beautiful wife.  In that duel Prince
Rudolf received a severe wound, and, recovering therefrom,
was adroitly smuggled off by the Ruritanian ambassador, who
had found him a pretty handful.  The nobleman was not
wounded in the duel; but the morning being raw and damp on
the occasion of the meeting, he contracted a severe chill, and,
failing to throw it off, he died some six months after the
departure of Prince Rudolf, without having found leisure to
adjust his relations with his wife--who, after another two
months, bore an heir to the title and estates of the family of
Burlesdon.  This lady was the Countess Amelia, whose picture
my sister-in-law wished to remove from the drawing-room in
Park Lane; and her husband was James, fifth Earl of Burlesdon
and twenty-second Baron Rassendyll, both in the peerage of
England, and a Knight of the Garter.  As for Rudolf, he went
back to Ruritania, married a wife, and ascended the throne,
whereon his progeny in the direct line have sat from then till
this very hour--with one short interval.  And, finally, if you
walk through the picture galleries at Burlesdon, among the fifty
portraits or so of the last century and a half, you will find five
or six, including that of the sixth earl, distinguished by long,
sharp, straight noses and a quantity of dark-red hair; these five
or six have also blue eyes, whereas among the Rassendylls dark
eyes are the commoner.

That is the explanation, and I am glad to have finished it:
the blemishes on honourable lineage are a delicate subject,
and certainly this heredity we hear so much about is the finest
scandalmonger in the world; it laughs at discretion, and writes
strange entries between the lines of the "Peerages".

It will be observed that my sister-in-law, with a want of
logic that must have been peculiar to herself (since we are
no longer allowed to lay it to the charge of her sex), treated my
complexion almost as an offence for which I was responsible,
hastening to assume from that external sign inward qualities of
which I protest my entire innocence; and this unjust inference
she sought to buttress by pointing to the uselessness of the life
I had led.  Well, be that as it may, I had picked up a good deal
of pleasure and a good deal of knowledge.  I had been to a German
school and a German university, and spoke German as readily
and perfectly as English; I was thoroughly at home in French;
I had a smattering of Italian and enough Spanish to swear by.
I was, I believe, a strong, though hardly fine swordsman and a good shot.
I could ride anything that had a back to sit on; and my head was as
cool a one as you could find, for all its flaming cover.  If you say that
I ought to have spent my time in useful labour, I am out of Court
and have nothing to say, save that my parents had no business to leave me
two thousand pounds a year and a roving disposition.

"The difference between you and Robert," said my sister-in-law,
who often (bless her!) speaks on a platform, and oftener still as if
she were on one, "is that he recognizes the duties of his position,
and you see the opportunities of yours."

"To a man of spirit, my dear Rose," I answered, "opportunities are duties."

"Nonsense!" said she, tossing her head; and after a moment she went on:
"Now, here's Sir Jacob Borrodaile offering you exactly what you might
be equal to."

"A thousand thanks!" I murmured.

"He's to have an Embassy in six months, and Robert says he is
sure that he'll take you as an attache.  Do take it, Rudolf--
to please me."

Now, when my sister-in-law puts the matter in that way,
wrinkling her pretty brows, twisting her little hands,
and growing wistful in the eyes, all on account of an idle scamp
like myself, for whom she has no natural responsibility, I am visited
with compunction.  Moreover, I thought it possible that I could
pass the time in the position suggested with some tolerable amusement.
Therefore I said:

"My dear sister, if in six months' time no unforeseen obstacle has arisen,
and Sir Jacob invites me, hang me if I don't go with Sir Jacob!"

"Oh, Rudolf, how good of you!  I am glad!"

"Where's he going to?"

"He doesn't know yet; but it's sure to be a good Embassy."

"Madame," said I, "for your sake I'll go, if it's no more than
a beggarly Legation.  When I do a thing, I don't do it by halves."

My promise, then, was given; but six months are six months,
and seem an eternity, and, inasmuch as they stretched between
me and my prospective industry (I suppose attaches are industrious;
but I know not, for I never became attache to Sir Jacob or anybody else),
I cast about for some desirable mode of spending them.
And it occurred to me suddenly that I would visit Ruritania.
It may seem strange that I had never visited that country yet;
but my father (in spite of a sneaking fondness for the Elphbergs,
which led him to give me, his second son, the famous Elphberg
name of Rudolf) had always been averse from my going, and,
since his death, my brother, prompted by Rose, had accepted
the family tradition which taught that a wide berth was to be given
to that country.  But the moment Ruritania had come into my head
I was eaten up with a curiosity to see it.  After all, red hair
and long noses are not confined to the House of Elphberg,
and the old story seemed a preposterously insufficient reason
for debarring myself from acquaintance with a highly interesting
and important kingdom, one which had played no small part
in European history, and might do the like again under the sway
of a young and vigorous ruler, such as the new King was rumoured to be.
My determination was clinched by reading in The Times that Rudolf the Fifth
was to be crowned at Strelsau in the course of the next three weeks,
and that great magnificence was to mark the occasion.  At once I made
up my mind to be present, and began my preparations.  But, inasmuch
as it has never been my practice to furnish my relatives with an
itinerary of my journeys and in this case I anticipated opposition
to my wishes, I gave out that I was going for a ramble in the Tyrol--
an old haunt of mine--and propitiated Rose's wrath by declaring
that I intended to study the political and social problems of the
interesting community which dwells in that neighbourhood.

"Perhaps," I hinted darkly, "there may be an outcome of the expedition."

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"Well,"said I carelessly, "there seems a gap that might be filled
by an exhaustive work on--"

"Oh! will you write a book?" she cried, clapping her hands.
"That would be splendid, wouldn't it, Robert?"

"It's the best of introductions to political life nowadays,"
observed my brother, who has, by the way, introduced himself
in this manner several times over.  Burlesdon on Ancient Theories
and Modern Facts and The Ultimate Outcome, by a Political Student,
are both works of recognized eminence.

"I believe you are right, Bob, my boy," said I.

"Now promise you'll do it," said Rose earnestly.

"No, I won't promise; but if I find enough material, I will."

"That's fair enough," said Robert.

"Oh, material doesn't matter!" she said, pouting.

But this time she could get no more than a qualified promise
out of me.  To tell the truth, I would have wagered a handsome
sum that the story of my expedition that summer would stain
no paper and spoil not a single pen.  And that shows how little
we know what the future holds; for here I am, fulfilling my
qualified promise, and writing, as I never thought to write,
a book--though it will hardly serve as an introduction to political life,
and has not a jot to do with the Tyrol.

Neither would it, I fear, please Lady Burlesdon, if I were to submit it
to her critical eye--a step which I have no intention of taking.




CHAPTER 2


Concerning the Colour of Men's Hair


It was a maxim of my Uncle William's that no man should pass
through Paris without spending four-and-twenty hours there.
My uncle spoke out of a ripe experience of the world, and I
honoured his advice by putting up for a day and a night
at "The Continental" on my way to--the Tyrol.  I called on
George Featherly at the Embassy, and we had a bit of dinner together
at Durand's, and afterwards dropped in to the Opera; and after
that we had a little supper, and after that we called on
Bertram Bertrand, a versifier of some repute and Paris correspondent
to The Critic.  He had a very comfortable suite of rooms, and we
found some pleasant fellows smoking and talking.  It struck me,
however, that Bertram himself was absent and in low spirits,
and when everybody except ourselves had gone, I rallied him
on his moping preoccupation.  He fenced with me for a while,
but at last, flinging himself on a sofa, he exclaimed:

"Very well; have it your own way.  I am in love--infernally in love!"

"Oh, you'll write the better poetry," said I, by way of consolation.

He ruffled his hair with his hand and smoked furiously.
George Featherly, standing with his back to the mantelpiece,
smiled unkindly.

"If it's the old affair," said he, "you may as well throw it up, Bert.
She's leaving Paris tomorrow."

"I know that," snapped Bertram.

"Not that it would make any difference if she stayed," pursued the
relentless George.  "She flies higher than the paper trade, my boy!"

"Hang her!" said Bertram.

"It would make it more interesting for me," I ventured to observe,
"if I knew who you were talking about."

"Antoinette Mauban," said George.

"De Mauban," growled Bertram.

"Oho!" said I, passing by the question of the `de'.  "You don't
mean to say, Bert--?"

"Can't you let me alone?"

"Where's she going to?" I asked, for the lady was something
of a celebrity.

George jingled his money, smiled cruelly at poor Bertram,
and answered pleasantly:

"Nobody knows.  By the way, Bert, I met a great man at her
house the other night--at least, about a month ago.
Did you ever meet him--the Duke of Strelsau?"

"Yes, I did," growled Bertram.

"An extremely accomplished man, I thought him."

It was not hard to see that George's references to the duke
were intended to aggravate poor Bertram's sufferings, so that
I drew the inference that the duke had distinguished Madame
de Mauban by his attentions.  She was a widow, rich, handsome, and,
according to repute, ambitious.  It was quite possible that she,
as George put it, was flying as high as a personage who was
everything he could be, short of enjoying strictly royal rank:
for the duke was the son of the late King of Ruritania
by a second and morganatic marriage, and half-brother
to the new King.  He had been his father's favourite,
and it had occasioned some unfavourable comment when
he had been created a duke, with a title derived from
no less a city than the capital itself.  His mother
had been of good, but not exalted, birth.

"He's not in Paris now, is he?" I asked.

"Oh no!  He's gone back to be present at the King's coronation;
a ceremony which, I should say, he'll not enjoy much.  But,
Bert, old man, don't despair!  He won't marry the fair Antoinette--
at least, not unless another plan comes to nothing.
Still perhaps she--" He paused and added, with a laugh:
"Royal attentions are hard to resist--you know that,
don't you, Rudolf?"

"Confound you!" said I; and rising, I left the hapless Bertram
in George's hands and went home to bed.

The next day George Featherly went with me to the station,
where I took a ticket for Dresden.

"Going to see the pictures?" asked George, with a grin.

George is an inveterate gossip, and had I told him that I was
off to Ruritania, the news would have been in London in three
days and in Park Lane in a week.  I was, therefore, about to
return an evasive answer, when he saved my conscience by
leaving me suddenly and darting across the platform.  Following
him with my eyes, I saw him lift his hat and accost a
graceful, fashionably dressed woman who had just appeared
from the booking-office.  She was, perhaps, a year or two over
thirty, tall, dark, and of rather full figure.  As George talked,
I
saw her glance at me, and my vanity was hurt by the thought
that, muffled in a fur coat and a neck-wrapper (for it was a chilly
April day) and wearing a soft travelling hat pulled down to my
ears, I must be looking very far from my best.  A moment later,
George rejoined me.

"You've got a charming travelling companion," he said.
"That's poor Bert Bertrand's goddess, Antoinette de Mauban,
and, like you, she's going to Dresden--also, no doubt, to see
the pictures.  It's very queer, though, that she doesn't
at present desire the honour of your acquaintance."

"I didn't ask to be introduced," I observed, a little annoyed.

"Well, I offered to bring you to her; but she said, "Another time."
Never mind, old fellow, perhaps there'll be a smash, and you'll
have a chance of rescuing her and cutting out the Duke of Strelsau!"

No smash, however, happened, either to me or to Madame de Mauban.
I can speak for her as confidently as for myself; for when,
after a night's rest in Dresden, I continued my journey,
she got into the same train.  Understanding that she wished
to be let alone, I avoided her carefully, but I saw that
she went the same way as I did to the very end of my journey,
and I took opportunities of having a good look at her,
when I could do so unobserved.

As soon as we reached the Ruritanian frontier (where the old
officer who presided over the Custom House favoured me with
such a stare that I felt surer than before of my Elphberg
physiognomy), I bought the papers, and found in them news
which affected my movements.  For some reason, which was
not clearly explained, and seemed to be something of a mystery,
the date of the coronation had been suddenly advanced,
and the ceremony was to take place on the next day but one.
The whole country seemed in a stir about it, and it was evident
that Strelsau was thronged.  Rooms were all let and hotels overflowing;
there would be very little chance of my obtaining a lodging,
and I should certainly have to pay an exorbitant charge for it.
I made up my mind to stop at Zenda, a small town fifty miles short
of the capital, and about ten from the frontier.  My train reached
there in the evening; I would spend the next day, Tuesday,
in a wander over the hills, which were said to be very fine,
and in taking a glance at the famous Castle, and go over by train
to Strelsau on the Wednesday morning, returning at night to sleep at Zenda.

Accordingly at Zenda I got out, and as the train passed where
I stood on the platform, I saw my friend Madame de Mauban in
her place; clearly she was going through to Strelsau, having,
with more providence than I could boast, secured apartments there.
I smiled to think how surprised George Featherly would have been
to know that she and I had been fellow travellers for so long.

I was very kindly received at the hotel--it was really no more
than an inn--kept by a fat old lady and her two daughters.
They were good, quiet people, and seemed very little interested
in the great doings at Strelsau.  The old lady's hero was the duke,
for he was now, under the late King's will, master of the Zenda
estates and of the Castle, which rose grandly on its steep hill
at the end of the valley a mile or so from the inn.  The old lady,
indeed, did not hesitate to express regret that the duke was not
on the throne, instead of his brother.

"We know Duke Michael," said she.  "He has always lived among us;
every Ruritanian knows Duke Michael.  But the King is almost
a stranger; he has been so much abroad, not one in ten knows
him even by sight."

"And now," chimed in one of the young women, "they say he
has shaved off his beard, so that no one at all knows him."

"Shaved his beard!" exclaimed her mother.  "Who says so?"

"Johann, the duke's keeper.  He has seen the King."

"Ah, yes.  The King, sir, is now at the duke's hunting-lodge
in the forest here; from here he goes to Strelsau to be crowned
on Wednesday morning."

I was interested to hear this, and made up my mind to walk next day
in the direction of the lodge, on the chance of coming across the King.
The old lady ran on garrulously:

"Ah, and I wish he would stay at his hunting--that and wine
(and one thing more) are all he loves, they say--and suffer our
duke to be crowned on Wednesday.  That I wish, and I don't
care who knows it."

"Hush, mother!" urged the daughters.

"Oh, there's many to think as I do!" cried the old woman stubbornly.

I threw myself back in my deep armchair, and laughed at her zeal.

"For my part," said the younger and prettier of the two daughters,
a fair, buxom, smiling wench, "I hate Black Michael!  A red Elphberg
for me, mother!  The King, they say, is as red as a fox or as--"

And she laughed mischievously as she cast a glance at me,
and tossed her head at her sister's reproving face.

"Many a man has cursed their red hair before now," muttered
the old lady--and I remembered James, fifth Earl of Burlesdon.

"But never a woman!" cried the girl.

"Ay, and women, when it was too late," was the stern answer,
reducing the girl to silence and blushes.

"How comes the King here?" I asked, to break an embarrassed silence.
"It is the duke's land here, you say."

"The duke invited him, sir, to rest here till Wednesday.
The duke is at Strelsau, preparing the King's reception."

"Then they're friends?"

"None better," said the old lady.

But my rosy damsel tossed her head again; she was not to be
repressed for long, and she broke out again:

"Ay, they love one another as men do who want the same place
and the same wife!"

The old woman glowered; but the last words pricked my curiosity,
and I interposed before she could begin scolding:

"What, the same wife, too!  How's that, young lady?"

"All the world knows that Black Michael--well then, mother,
the duke--would give his soul to marry his cousin,
the Princess Flavia, and that she is to be the queen."

"Upon my word," said I, "I begin to be sorry for your duke.
But if a man will be a younger son, why he must take what the
elder leaves, and be as thankful to God as he can;" and,
thinking of myself, I shrugged my shoulders and laughed.
And then I thought also of Antoinette de Mauban and her
journey to Strelsau.

"It's little dealing Black Michael has with--" began the girl,
braving her mother's anger; but as she spoke a heavy step
sounded on the floor, and a gruff voice asked in a threatening tone:

"Who talks of "Black Michael" in his Highness's own burgh?"

The girl gave a little shriek, half of fright--half, I think,
of amusement.

"You'll not tell of me, Johann?" she said.

"See where your chatter leads," said the old lady.

The man who had spoken came forward.

"We have company, Johann," said my hostess, and the fellow
plucked off his cap.  A moment later he saw me, and,
to my amazement, he started back a step, as though he had
seen something wonderful.

"What ails you, Johann?" asked the elder girl.  "This is
a gentleman on his travels, come to see the coronation."

The man had recovered himself, but he was staring at me
with an intense, searching, almost fierce glance.

"Good evening to you," said I.

"Good evening, sir," he muttered, still scrutinizing me,
and the merry girl began to laugh as she called--

"See, Johann, it is the colour you love!  He started to see
your hair, sir.  It's not the colour we see most of here in Zenda."

"I crave your pardon, sir," stammered the fellow,
with puzzled eyes.  "I expected to see no one."

"Give him a glass to drink my health in; and I'll bid you good night,
and thanks to you, ladies, for your courtesy and pleasant conversation."

So speaking, I rose to my feet, and with a slight bow turned
to the door.  The young girl ran to light me on the way,
and the man fell back to let me pass, his eyes still fixed on me.
The moment I was by, he started a step forward, asking:

"Pray, sir, do you know our King?"

"I never saw him," said I. "I hope to do so on Wednesday."

He said no more, but I felt his eyes following me till the
door closed behind me.  My saucy conductor, looking over her
shoulder at me as she preceded me upstairs, said:

"There's no pleasing Master Johann for one of your colour, sir."

"He prefers yours, maybe?" I suggested.

"I meant, sir, in a man," she answered, with a coquettish glance.


The duke's blood, spurting out, had stained his opponent's shirt;
but Rupert, not knowing that he had dealt Michael his death,
was eager to finish the encounter.  How he meant to deal with
the other three of the band, I know not.  I dare say he did not think,
for the killing of Michael was not premeditated.  Antoinette,
left alone with the duke, had tried to stanch his wound,
and thus was she busied till he died; and then, hearing Rupert's taunts,
she had come forth to avenge him.  Me she had not seen, nor did she
till I darted out of my ambush, and leapt after Rupert into the moat.

The same moment found my friends on the scene.  They had
reached the chateau in due time, and waited ready by the door.
But Johann, swept with the rest to the rescue of the duke,
did not open it; nay, he took a part against Rupert, putting himself
forward more bravely than any in his anxiety to avert suspicion;
and he had received a wound, in the embrasure of the window.
Till nearly half-past two Sapt waited; then, following my orders,
he had sent Fritz to search the banks of the moat.  I was not there.
Hastening back, Fritz told Sapt; and Sapt was for following orders still,
and riding at full speed back to Tarlenheim; while Fritz would not hear
of abandoning me, let me have ordered what I would.  On this they disputed
some few minutes; then Sapt, persuaded by Fritz, detached a party
under Bernenstein to gallop back to Tarlenheim and bring up the marshal,
while the rest fell to on the great door of the chateau.
For several minutes it resisted them; then, just as Antoinette de Mauban
fired at Rupert of Hentzau on the bridge, they broke in,
eight of them in all:  and the first door they came to was the door
of Michael's room; and Michael lay dead across the threshold,
with a sword-thrust through his breast.  Sapt cried out at his death,
as I had heard, and they rushed on the servants; but these, in fear,
dropped their weapons, and Antoinette flung herself weeping at Sapt's feet.
And all she cried was,that I had been at the end of the bridge and leapt off.
"What of the prisoner?" asked Sapt; but she shook her head.  Then Sapt
and Fritz, with the gentlemen behind them, crossed the bridge,
slowly, warily, and without noise; and Fritz stumbled over
the body of De Gautet in the way of the door.  They felt him
and found him dead.

Then they consulted, listening eagerly for any sound from
the cells below; but there came none, and they were greatly
afraid that the King's guards had killed him, and having
pushed his body through the great pipe, had escaped the same
way themselves.  Yet, because I had been seen here, they had
still some hope (thus indeed Fritz, in his friendship, told me);
and going back to Michael's body, pushing aside Antoinette,
who prayed by it, they found a key to the door which I had locked,
and opened the door.  The staircase was dark, and they would not
use a torch at first, lest they should be more exposed to fire.
But soon Fritz cried:  "The door down there is open! See, there is light!"
So they went on boldly, and found none to oppose them.  And when they
came to the outer room and saw the Belgian, Bersonin, lying dead,
they thanked God, Sapt saying:  "Ay, he has been here." Then rushing
into the King's cell, they found Detchard lying dead across
the dead physician, and the King on his back with his chair by him.
And Fritz cried:  "He's dead!" and Sapt drove all out of the room
except Fritz, and knelt down by the King; and, having learnt more
of wounds and the sign of death than I, he soon knew that the King
was not dead, nor, if properly attended, would die.  And they covered
his face and carried him to Duke Michael's room, and laid him there;
and Antoinette rose from praying by the body of the duke and went
to bathe the King's head and dress his wounds, till a doctor came.
And Sapt, seeing I had been there, and having heard Antoinette's story,
sent Fritz to search the moat and then the forest.  He dared send no one else.
And Fritz found my horse, and feared the worst.  Then, as I have told,
he found me, guided by the shout with which I had called on Rupert
to stop and face me.  And I think a man has never been more glad
to find his own brother alive than was Fritz to come on me; so that,
in love and anxiety for me, he thought nothing of a thing so great
as would have been the death of Rupert Hentzau.  Yet, had Fritz
killed him, I should have grudged it.

The enterprise of the King's rescue being thus prosperously
concluded, it lay on Colonel Sapt to secure secrecy as to the
King ever having been in need of rescue.  Antoinette de Mauban
and Johann the keeper (who, indeed, was too much hurt to be
wagging his tongue just now) were sworn to reveal nothing;
and Fritz went forth to find--not the King, but the unnamed
friend of the King, who had lain in Zenda and flashed for a
moment before the dazed eyes of Duke Michael's servants on
the drawbridge.  The metamorphosis had happened; and the King,
wounded almost to death by the attacks of the gaolers who
guarded his friend, had at last overcome them, and rested now,
wounded but alive, in Black Michael's own room in the Castle.
There he had been carried, his face covered with a cloak,
from the cell; and thence orders issued, that if his friend were
found, he should be brought directly and privately to the King,
and that meanwhile messengers should ride at full speed to
Tarlenheim, to tell Marshall Strakencz to assure the princess of
the King's safety and to come himself with all speed to greet
the King.  The princess was enjoined to remain at Tarlenheim,
and there await her cousin's coming or his further injunctions.
Thus the King would come to his own again, having wrought
brave deeds, and escaped, almost by a miracle, the treacherous
assault of his unnatural brother.

This ingenious arrangement of my long-headed old friend
prospered in every way, save where it encountered a force
that often defeats the most cunning schemes.  I mean nothing else
than the pleasure of a woman.  For, let her cousin and sovereign
send what command he chose (or Colonel Sapt chose for him),
and let Marshal Strakencz insist as he would, the Princess
Flavia was in no way minded to rest at Tarlenheim while her
lover lay wounded at Zenda; and when the Marshal, with a
small suite, rode forth from Tarlenheim on the way to Zenda,
the princess's carriage followed immediately behind, and in
this order they passed through the town, where the report was
already rife that the King, going the night before to remonstrate
with his brother, in all friendliness, for that he held one of
the King's friends in confinement in the Castle, had been most
traitorously set upon; that there had been a desperate conflict;
that the duke was slain with several of his gentlemen; and that
the King, wounded as he was, had seized and held the Castle
of Zenda.  All of which talk made, as may be supposed, a mighty
excitement:  and the wires were set in motion, and the tidings
came to Strelsau only just after orders had been sent thither
to parade the troops and overawe the dissatisfied quarters
of the town with a display of force.

Thus the Princess Flavia came to Zenda.  And as she drove up the hill,
with the Marshal riding by the wheel and still imploring her to return
in obedience to the King's orders, Fritz von Tarlenheim,
with the prisoner of Zenda, came to the edge of the forest.
I had revived from my swoon, and walked, resting on Fritz's arm;
and looking out from the cover of the trees, I saw the princess.
Suddenly understanding from a glance at my companion's face
that we must not meet her, I sank on my knees behind a clump of bushes.
But there was one whom we had forgotten, but who followed us,
and was not disposed to let slip the chance of earning a smile
and maybe a crown or two; and, while we lay hidden,
the little farm-girl came by us and ran to the princess,
curtseying and crying:

"Madame, the King is here--in the bushes!  May I guide you to him, madame?"

"Nonsense, child!" said old Strakencz; "the King lies wounded in the Castle."

"Yes, sir, he's wounded, I know; but he's there--with Count Fritz--
and not at the Castle," she persisted.

"Is he in two places, or are there two Kings?" asked Flavia, bewildered.
"And how should he be there?"

"He pursued a gentleman, madame, and they fought till Count Fritz came;
and the other gentleman took my father's horse from me and rode away;
but the King is here with Count Fritz.  Why, madame, is there another man
in Ruritania like the King?"

"No, my child," said Flavia softly (I was told it afterwards),
and she smiled and gave the girl money.  "I will go and see
this gentleman," and she rose to alight from the carriage.

But at this moment Sapt came riding from the Castle, and,
seeing the princess, made the best of a bad job, and cried
to her that the King was well tended and in no danger.

"In the Castle?" she asked.

"Where else, madame?" said he, bowing.

"But this girl says he is yonder--with Count Fritz."

Sapt turned his eyes on the child with an incredulous smile.

"Every fine gentleman is a King to such," said he.

"Why, he's as like the King as one pea to another, madame!"
cried the girl, a little shaken but still obstinate.

Sapt started round.  The old Marshal's face asked unspoken questions.
Flavia's glance was no less eloquent.  Suspicion spread quick.

"I'll ride myself and see this man," said Sapt hastily.

"Nay, I'll come myself," said the princess.

"Then come alone," he whispered.

And she, obedient to the strange hinting in his face, prayed the Marshal
and the rest to wait; and she and Sapt came on foot towards where we lay,
Sapt waving to the farm-girl to keep at a distance.  And when I saw them
coming, I sat in a sad heap on the ground, and buried my face in my hands.
I could not look at her.  Fritz knelt by me, laying his hand on my shoulder.

"Speak low, whatever you say," I heard Sapt whisper as they came up;
and the next thing I heard was a low cry--half of joy, half of fear--
from the princess:

"It is he!  Are you hurt?"

And she fell on the ground by me, and gently pulled my hands away;
but I kept my eyes to the ground.

"It is the King!" she said.  "Pray, Colonel Sapt,
tell me where lay the wit of the joke you played on me?"

We answered none of us; we three were silent before her.
Regardless of them, she threw her arms round my neck
and kissed me.  Then Sapt spoke in a low hoarse whisper:

"It is not the King.  Don't kiss him; he's not the King."

She drew back for a moment; then, with an arm still round
my neck, she asked, in superb indignation:

"Do I not know my love?  Rudolf my love!"

"It is not the King," said old Sapt again; and a sudden sob
broke from tender-hearted Fritz.

It was the sob that told her no comedy was afoot.

"He is the King!" she cried.  "It is the King's face--the King's ring--
my ring!  It is my love!"

"Your love, madame," said old Sapt, "but not the King.
The King is there in the Castle.  This gentleman--"

"Look at me, Rudolf! look at me!" she cried, taking my face
between her hands.  "Why do you let them torment me?
Tell me what it means!"

Then I spoke, gazing into her eyes.

"God forgive me, madame!" I said.  "I am not the King!"

I felt her hands clutch my cheeks.  She gazed at me as never
man's face was scanned yet.  And I, silent again, saw wonder born,
and doubt grow, and terror spring to life as she looked.
And very gradually the grasp of her hands slackened;
she turned to Sapt, to Fritz, and back to me:
then suddenly she reeled forward and fell in my arms;
and with a great cry of pain I gathered her to me
and kissed her lips.  Sapt laid his hand on my arm.
I looked up in his face.  And I laid her softly on the ground,
and stood up, looking on her, cursing heaven that young
Rupert's sword had spared me for this sharper pang.




CHAPTER 21


If love were all!


It was night, and I was in the cell wherein the King had lain
in the Castle of Zenda.  The great pipe that Rupert of Hentzau
had nicknamed "Jacob's Ladder" was gone, and the lights in the
room across the moat twinkled in the darkness.  All was still;
the din and clash of strife were gone.  I had spent the day hidden
in the forest, from the time when Fritz had led me off,
leaving Sapt with the princess.  Under cover of dusk, muffled up,
I had been brought to the Castle and lodged where I now lay.
Though three men had died there--two of them by my hand--
I was not troubled by ghosts.  I had thrown myself on a pallet
by the window, and was looking out on the black water; Johann,
the keeper, still pale from his wound, but not much hurt besides,
had brought me supper.  He told me that the King was doing well,
that he had seen the princess; that she and he, Sapt and Fritz,
had been long together.  Marshal Strakencz was gone to Strelsau;
Black Michael lay in his coffin, and Antoinette de Mauban watched
by him; had I not heard, from the chapel, priests singing mass for him?

Outside there were strange rumours afloat.  Some said that
the prisoner of Zenda was dead; some, that he had vanished
yet alive; some, that he was a friend who had served the King
well in some adventure in England; others, that he had discovered
the Duke's plots, and had therefore been kidnapped by him.
One or two shrewd fellows shook their heads and said only that
they would say nothing, but they had suspicions that more was
to be known than was known, if Colonel Sapt would tell all he knew.

Thus Johann chattered till I sent him away and lay there alone,
thinking, not of the future, but--as a man is wont to do when stirring
things have happened to him--rehearsing the events of the past weeks,
and wondering how strangely they had fallen out.  And above me,
in the stillness of the night, I heard the standards flapping
against their poles, for Black Michael's banner hung there half-mast high,
and above it the royal flag of Ruritania, floating for one night more
over my head.  Habit grows so quick, that only by an effort did I recollect
that it floated no longer for me.

Presently Fritz von Tarlenheim came into the room.  I was standing
then by the window; the glass was opened, and I was idly fingering
the cement which clung to the masonry where "Jacob's Ladder" had been.
He told me briefly that the King wanted me, and together we crossed
the drawbridge and entered the room that had been Black Michael's.

The King was lying there in bed; our doctor from Tarlenheim
was in attendance on him, and whispered to me that my visit
must be brief.  The King held out his hand and shook mine.
Fritz and the doctor withdrew to the window.

I took the King's ring from my finger and placed it on his.

"I have tried not to dishonour it, sire," said I.

"I can't talk much to you," he said, in a weak voice.  "I have
had a great fight with Sapt and the Marshal--for we have told
the Marshal everything.  I wanted to take you to Strelsau
and keep you with me, and tell everyone of what you had done;
and you would have been my best and nearest friend, Cousin Rudolf.
But they tell me I must not, and that the secret must be kept--
if kept it can be."

"They are right, sire.  Let me go.  My work here is done."

"Yes, it is done, as no man but you could have done it.  When
they see me again, I shall have my beard on; I shall--yes, faith,
I shall be wasted with sickness.  They will not wonder that the King
looks changed in face.  Cousin, I shall try to let them find him
changed in nothing else.  You have shown me how to play the King."

"Sire," said I. "I can take no praise from you.  It is by the narrowest
grace of God that I was not a worse traitor than your brother."

He turned inquiring eyes on me; but a sick man shrinks from puzzles,
and he had no strength to question me.  His glance fell on Flavia's ring,
which I wore.  I thought he would question me about it; but, after fingering
it idly, he let his head fall on his pillow.

"I don't know when I shall see you again," he said faintly, almost listlessly.

"If I can ever serve you again, sire," I answered.

His eyelids closed.  Fritz came with the doctor.  I kissed the King's hand,
and let Fritz lead me away.  I have never seen the King since.

Outside, Fritz turned, not to the right, back towards the drawbridge,
but to the left, and without speaking led me upstairs, through a handsome
corridor in the chateau.

"Where are we going?" I asked.

Looking away from me, Fritz answered:

"She has sent for you.  When it is over, come back to the bridge.
I'll wait for you there."

"What does she want?" said I, breathing quickly.

He shook his head.

"Does she know everything?"

"Yes, everything."

He opened a door, and gently pushing me in, closed it behind me.
I found myself in a drawing-room, small and richly furnished.
At first I thought that I was alone, for the light that came from
a pair of shaded candles on the mantelpiece was very dim.
But presently I discerned a woman's figure standing by the window.
I knew it was the princess, and I walked up to her, fell on one knee,
and carried the hand that hung by her side to my lips.  She neither moved
nor spoke.  I rose to my feet, and, piercing the gloom with my eager eyes,
saw her pale face and the gleam of her hair, and before I knew,
I spoke softly:

"Flavia!"

She trembled a little, and looked round.  Then she darted to me,
taking hold of me.

"Don't stand, don't stand!  No, you mustn't!  You're hurt!
Sit down--here, here!"

She made me sit on a sofa, and put her hand on my forehead.

"How hot your head is," she said, sinking on her knees by me.
Then she laid her head against me, and I heard her murmur:
"My darling, how hot your head is!"

Somehow love gives even to a dull man the knowledge of his lover's heart.
I had come to humble myself and pray pardon for my presumption;
but what I said now was:

"I love you with all my heart and soul!"

For what troubled and shamed her?  Not her love for me,
but the fear that I had counterfeited the lover as I had acted
the King, and taken her kisses with a smothered smile.

"With all my life and heart," said I, as she clung to me.
"Always, from the first moment I saw you in the Cathedral!
There has been but one woman in the world to me--and there
will be no other.  But God forgive me the wrong I've done you!"

"They made you do it!" she said quickly; and she added,
raising her head and looking in my eyes:  "It might have made no
difference if I'd known it.  It was always you, never the King!"

"I meant to tell you," said I. "I was going to on the night
of the ball in Strelsau, when Sapt interrupted me.  After that,
I couldn't--I couldn't risk losing you before--before--I must!
My darling, for you I nearly left the King to die!"

"I know, I know!  What are we to do now, Rudolf?"

I put my arm round her and held her up while I said:

"I am going away tonight."

"Ah, no, no!" she cried.  "Not tonight!"

"I must go tonight, before more people have seen me.
And how would you have me stay, sweetheart, except--?"

"If I could come with you!" she whispered very low.

"My God!" said I roughly, "don't talk about that!"
and I thrust her a little back from me.

"Why not?  I love you.  You are as good a gentleman as the King!"

Then I was false to all that I should have held by.  For I caught
her in my arms and prayed her, in words that I will not write,
to come with me, daring all Ruritania to take her from me.
And for a while she listened, with wondering, dazzled eyes.
But as her eyes looked on me, I grew ashamed, and my voice died
away in broken murmurs and stammerings, and at last I was silent.

She drew herself away from me and stood against the wall,
while I sat on the edge of the sofa, trembling in every limb,
knowing what I had done--loathing it, obstinate not to undo it.
So we rested a long time.

"I am mad!" I said sullenly.

"I love your madness, dear," she answered.

Her face was away from me, but I caught the sparkle of a tear on her cheek.
I clutched the sofa with my hand and held myself there.

"Is love the only thing?" she asked, in low, sweet tones that
seemed to bring a calm even to my wrung heart.  "If love were
the only thing, I would follow you--in rags, if need be--to the
world's end; for you hold my heart in the hollow of your hand!
But is love the only thing?"

I made no answer.  It gives me shame now to think that I would not help her.

She came near me and laid her hand on my shoulder.  I put my hand up
and held hers.

"I know people write and talk as if it were.  Perhaps, for some,
Fate lets it be.  Ah, if I were one of them!  But if love had been
the only thing, you would have let the King die in his cell."

I kissed her hand.

"Honour binds a woman too, Rudolf.  My honour lies in being true
to my country and my House.  I don't know why God has let me love you;
but I know that I must stay."

Still I said nothing; and she, pausing a while, then went on:

"Your ring will always be on my finger, your heart in my heart,
the touch of your lips on mine.  But you must go and I must stay.
Perhaps I must do what it kills me to think of doing."

I knew what she meant, and a shiver ran through me.  But I
could not utterly fail her.  I rose and took her hand.

"Do what you will, or what you must," I said.  "I think God shows
His purposes to such as you.  My part is lighter; for your ring
shall be on my finger and your heart in mine, and no touch save
of your lips will ever be on mine.  So, may God comfort you, my darling!"

There struck on our ears the sound of singing.  The priests
in the chapel were singing masses for the souls of those who
lay dead.  They seemed to chant a requiem over our buried joy,
to pray forgiveness for our love that would not die.  The soft,
sweet, pitiful music rose and fell as we stood opposite one another,
her hands in mine.

"My queen and my beauty!" said I.

"My lover and true knight!" she said.  "Perhaps we shall never
see one another again.  Kiss me, my dear, and go!"

I kissed her as she bade me; but at the last she clung to me,
whispering nothing but my name, and that over and over again
--and again--and again; and then I left her.

Rapidly I walked down to the bridge.  Sapt and Fritz were
waiting for me.  Under their directions I changed my dress,
and muffling my face, as I had done more than once before,
I mounted with them at the door of the Castle, and we three
rode through the night and on to the breaking day, and found
ourselves at a little roadside station just over the border
of Ruritania.  The train was not quite due, and I walked
with them in a meadow by a little brook while we waited for it.
They promised to send me all news; they overwhelmed me with
kindness--even old Sapt was touched to gentleness, while Fritz
was half unmanned.  I listened in a kind of dream to all they said.
"Rudolf!  Rudolf!  Rudolf!" still rang in my ears--a burden of
sorrow and of love.  At last they saw that I could not heed them,
and we walked up and down in silence, till Fritz touched me on the arm,
and I saw, a mile or more away, the blue smoke of the train.
Then I held out a hand to each of them.

"We are all but half-men this morning," said I, smiling.
"But we have been men, eh, Sapt and Fritz, old friends?
We have run a good course between us."

"We have defeated traitors and set the King firm on his throne,"
said Sapt.

Then Fritz von Tarlenheim suddenly, before I could discern
his purpose or stay him, uncovered his head and bent as he
used to do, and kissed my hand; and as I snatched it away,
he said, trying to laugh:

"Heaven doesn't always make the right men kings!"

Old Sapt twisted his mouth as he wrung my hand.

"The devil has his share in most things," said he.

The people at the station looked curiously at the tall man
with the muffled face, but we took no notice of their glances.
I stood with my two friends and waited till the train came up to us.
Then we shook hands again, saying nothing; and both this time--and,
indeed, from old Sapt it seemed strange--bared their heads,
and so stood still till the train bore me away from their sight.
So that it was thought some great man travelled privately
for his pleasure from the little station that morning; whereas,
in truth it was only I, Rudolf Rassendyll, an English gentleman,
a cadet of a good house, but a man of no wealth nor position,
nor of much rank.  They would have been disappointed to know that.
Yet had they known all they would have looked more curiously still.
For, be I what I might now, I had been for three months a King,
which, if not a thing to be proud of, is at least an experience
to have undergone.  Doubtless I should have thought more of it,
had there not echoed through the air, from the towers of Zenda
that we were leaving far away, into my ears and into my heart
the cry of a woman's love--"Rudolf!  Rudolf! Rudolf!"

Hark!  I hear it now!




CHAPTER 22


Present, Past--and Future?


The details of my return home can have but little interest.
I went straight to the Tyrol and spent a quiet fortnight--
mostly on my  back, for a severe chill developed itself;
and I was also the victim of a nervous reaction, which made
me weak as a baby.  As soon as I had reached my quarters,
I sent an apparently careless postcard to my brother,
announcing my good health and prospective return.
That would serve to satisfy the inquiries as to my whereabouts,
which were probably still vexing the Prefect of the Police of Strelsau.
I let my moustache and imperial grow again; and as hair comes quickly
on my face, they were respectable, though not luxuriant,
by the time that I landed myself in Paris and called on
my friend George Featherly.  My interview with him was chiefly
remarkable for the number of unwilling but necessary falsehoods
that I told; and I rallied him unmercifully when he told me that
he had made up his mind that I had gone in the track of Madame de Mauban
to Strelsau. The lady, it appeared, was back in Paris, but was living
in great seclusion--a fact for which gossip found no difficulty
in accounting.  Did not all the world know of the treachery
and death of Duke Michael?  Nevertheless, George bade Bertram
Bertrand be of good cheer, "for," said he flippantly, "a live
poet is better than a dead duke." Then he turned on me and asked:

"What have you been doing to your moustache?"

"To tell the truth," I answered, assuming a sly air, "a man
now and then has reasons for wishing to alter his appearance.
But it's coming on very well again."

"What?  Then I wasn't so far out!  If not the fair Antoinette,
there was a charmer?"

"There is always a charmer," said I, sententiously.

But George would not be satisfied till he had wormed out
of me (he took much pride in his ingenuity) an absolutely
imaginary love-affair, attended with the proper soupcon of scandal,
which had kept me all this time in the peaceful regions of the Tyrol.
In return for this narrative, George regaled me with a great deal
of what he called "inside information" (known only to diplomatists),
as to the true course of events in Ruritania, the plots and counterplots.
In his opinion, he told me, with a significant nod, there was more to be said
for Black Michael than the public supposed; and he hinted at a well-founded
suspicion that the mysterious prisoner of Zenda, concerning whom
a good many paragraphs had appeared, was not a man at all, but
(here I had much ado not to smile) a woman disguised as a man;
and that strife between the King and his brother for this
imaginary lady's favour was at the bottom of their quarrel.

"Perhaps it was Madame de Mauban herself," I suggested.

"No!" said George decisively, "Antoinette de Mauban was jealous
of her, and betrayed the duke to the King for that reason.
And, to confirm what I say, it's well known that the
Princess Flavia is now extremely cold to the King,
after having been most affectionate."

At this point I changed the subject, and escaped from George's
"inspired" delusions.  But if diplomatists never know anything
more than they had succeeded in finding out in this instance,
they appear to me to be somewhat expensive luxuries.

While in Paris I wrote to Antoinette, though I did not venture
to call upon her.  I received in return a very affecting letter,
in which she assured me that the King's generosity and kindness,
no less than her regard for me, bound her conscience to absolute secrecy.
She expressed the intention of settling in the country, and withdrawing
herself entirely from society.  Whether she carried out her designs,
I have never heard; but as I have not met her, or heard news of her
up to this time, it is probable that she did.  There is no doubt
that she was deeply attached to the Duke of Strelsau; and her conduct
at the time of his death proved that no knowledge of the man's real character
was enough to root her regard for him out of her heart.

I had one more battle left to fight--a battle that would, I knew,
be severe, and was bound to end in my complete defeat.  Was I
not back from the Tyrol, without having made any study of its
inhabitants, institutions, scenery, fauna, flora, or other features?
Had I not simply wasted my time in my usual frivolous,
good-for-nothing way?  That was the aspect of the matter which,
I was obliged to admit, would present itself to my sister-in-law;
and against a verdict based on such evidence, I had really no
defence to offer.  It may be supposed, then, that I presented myself
in Park Lane in a shamefaced, sheepish fashion.  On the whole,
my reception was not so alarming as I had feared.  It turned out
that I had done, not what Rose wished, but--the next best thing--
what she prophesied.  She had declared that I should make no notes,
record no observations,gather no materials.  My brother, on the other hand,
had been weak enough to maintain that a serious resolve had at length
animated me.

When I returned empty-handed, Rose was so occupied in triumphing
over Burlesdon that she let me down quite easily,
devoting the greater part of her reproaches to my failure
to advertise my friends of my whereabouts.

"We've wasted a lot of time trying to find you," she said.

"I know you have," said I. "Half our ambassadors have led
weary lives on my account.  George Featherly told me so.
But why should you have been anxious?  I can take care of myself."

"Oh, it wasn't that," she cried scornfully, "but I wanted to tell
you about Sir Jacob Borrodaile.  You know, he's got an Embassy
--at least, he will have in a month--and he wrote to say he
hoped you would go with him."

"Where's he going to?"

"He's going to succeed Lord Topham at Strelsau," said she.
"You couldn't have a nicer place, short of Paris."

"Strelsau!  H'm!" said I, glancing at my brother.

"Oh, THAT doesn't matter!" exclaimed Rose impatiently.
"Now, you will go, won't you?"

"I don't know that I care about it!"

"Oh, you're too exasperating!"

"And I don't think I can go to Strelsau.  My dear Rose, would
it be--suitable?"

"Oh, nobody remembers that horrid old story now."

Upon this, I took out of my pocket a portrait of the King of
Ruritania.  It had been taken a month or two before he ascended
the throne.  She could not miss my point when I said, putting it
into her hands:

"In case you've not seen, or not noticed, a picture of Rudolf V,
there he is.  Don't you think they might recall the story, if I
appeared at the Court of Ruritania?"

My sister-in-law looked at the portrait, and then at me.

"Good gracious!" she said, and flung the photograph down on the table.

"What do you say, Bob?" I asked.

Burlesdon got up, went to a corner of the room, and searched
in a heap of newspapers.  Presently he came back with a copy
of the Illustrated London News.  Opening the paper, he displayed
a double-page engraving of the Coronation of Rudolf V at Strelsau.
The photograph and the picture he laid side by side.  I sat
at the table fronting them; and, as I looked, I grew absorbed.
My eye travelled from my own portrait to Sapt, to Strakencz, to the
rich robes of the Cardinal, to Black Michael's face, to the stately
figure of the princess by his side.  Long I looked and eagerly.
I was roused by my brother's hand on my shoulder.  He was gazing
down at me with a puzzled expression.

"It's a remarkable likeness, you see," said I. "I really think
I had better not go to Ruritania."

Rose, though half convinced, would not abandon her position.

"It's just an excuse," she said pettishly.  "You don't want
to do anything.  Why, you might become an ambassador!"

"I don't think I want to be an ambassador," said I.

"It's more than you ever will be," she retorted.

That is very likely true, but it is not more than I have been.

The idea of being an ambassador could scarcely dazzle me.
I had been a king!

So pretty Rose left us in dudgeon; and Burlesdon, lighting a cigarette,
looked at me still with that curious gaze.

"That picture in the paper--" he said.

"Well, what of it?  It shows that the King of Ruritania
and your humble servant are as like as two peas."

My brother shook his head.

"I suppose so," he said.  "But I should know you from the man
in the photograph."

"And not from the picture in the paper?"

"I should know the photograph from the picture:  the picture's
very like the photograph, but--"

"Well?"

"It's more like you!" said my brother.

My brother is a good man and true--so that, for all that he
is a married man and mighty fond of his wife, he should know
any secret of mine.  But this secret was not mine,
and I could not tell it to him.

"I don't think it's so much like me as the photograph,"
said I boldly.  "But, anyhow, Bob, I won't go to Strelsau."

"No, don't go to Strelsau, Rudolf," said he.

And whether he suspects anything, or has a glimmer of the truth,
I do not know.  If he has, he keeps it to himself, and he and I
never refer to it.  And we let Sir Jacob Borrodaile find another attache.

Since all these events whose history I have set down happened
I have lived a very quiet life at a small house which I have
taken in the country.  The ordinary ambitions and aims of men
in my position seem to me dull and unattractive.  I have little
fancy for the whirl of society, and none for the jostle of politics.
Lady Burlesdon utterly despairs of me; my neighbours think me
an indolent, dreamy, unsociable fellow.  Yet I am a young man;
and sometimes I have a fancy--the superstitious would call it
a presentiment--that my part in life is not yet altogether played;
that, somehow and some day, I shall mix again in great affairs,
I shall again spin policies in a busy brain, match my wits against
my enemies', brace my muscles to fight a good fight and strike stout blows.
Such is the tissue of my thoughts as, with gun or rod in
hand, I wander through the woods or by the side of the stream.
Whether the fancy will be fulfilled, I cannot tell--still less whether
the scene that, led by memory, I lay for my new exploits will be
the true one--for I love to see myself once again in the crowded
streets of Strelsau, or beneath the frowning keep of the Castle of Zenda.

Thus led, my broodings leave the future, and turn back on the
past.  Shapes rise before me in long array--the wild first revel
with the King, the rush with my brave tea-table, the night in the moat,
the pursuit in the forest:  my friends and my foes, the people
who learnt to love and honour me, the desperate men who tried to kill me.
And, from amidst these last, comes one who alone of all of them yet
moves on earth, though where I know not, yet plans (as I do not doubt)
wickedness, yet turns women's hearts to softness and men's to fear and hate.
Where is young Rupert of Hentzau--the boy who came so nigh to beating me?
When his name comes into my head, I feel my hand grip and the blood
move quicker through my veins:  and the hint of Fate--the presentiment--
seems to grow stronger and more definite, and to whisper insistently
in my ear that I have yet a hand to play with young Rupert;
therefore I exercise myself in arms, and seek to put off the day
when the vigour of youth must leave me.

One break comes every year in my quiet life.  Then I go to Dresden,
and there I am met by my dear friend and companion, Fritz von Tarlenheim.
Last time, his pretty wife Helga came, and a lusty crowing baby with her.
And for a week Fritz and I are together, and I hear all of what falls out
in Strelsau; and in the evenings, as we walk and smoke together,
we talk of Sapt, and of the King, and often of young Rupert;
and, as the hours grow small, at last we speak of Flavia.
For every year Fritz carries with him to Dresden a little box;
in it lies a red rose, and round the stalk of the rose is a slip of paper
with the words written:  "Rudolf--Flavia--always."  And the like I send back
by him.  That message, and the wearing of the rings, are all that
now bind me and the Queen of Ruritania.  Far--nobler, as I hold her,
for the act--she has followed where her duty to her country and
her House led her, and is the wife of the King, uniting his subjects
to him by the love they bear to her, giving peace and quiet days
to thousands by her self-sacrifice.  There are moments when I dare not
think of it, but there are others when I rise in spirit to where she
ever dwells; then I can thank God that I love the noblest lady in the world,
the most gracious and beautiful, and that there was nothing in my love
that made her fall short in her high duty.

Shall I see her face again--the pale face and the glorious hair?
Of that I know nothing; Fate has no hint, my heart no presentiment.
I do not know.  In this world, perhaps--nay, it is likely--never.
And can it be that somewhere, in a manner whereof our flesh-bound
minds have no apprehension, she and I will be together again,
with nothing to come between us, nothing to forbid our love?
That I know not, nor wiser heads than mine. But if it be never--
if I can never hold sweet converse again with her, or look upon her face,
or know from her her love; why, then, this side the grave, I will live
as becomes the man whom she loves; and, for the other side,
I must pray a dreamless sleep.

End of the Project Gutenberg Edition of The Prisoner of Zenda


